Participant Information Sheet

Study Title: A pilot study of mental health, wellbeing and usage of dating apps amongst adults
Researcher(s): Professor Sam Chamberlain; Dr Anthony Quinn
University email: sam.chamberlain@soton.ac.uk
Ethics/ERGO no: 74538
Version and date: 2   25/07/2022


What is the research about? 

My name is Professor Sam Chamberlain and I am a Professor of Psychiatry at the University of Southampton. You are being invited to participate in a study regarding usage of dating apps, mental health and wellbeing. We are seeking to investigate relationships between mental health, personality types and usage of dating apps and to what extent there is evidence to suggest that usage of dating apps might be associated with problematic usage of the internet [PUI].

This study was approved by the Faculty Research Ethics Committee (FREC) at the University of Southampton (Ethics/ ERGO Number: 74358). 


Why have I been asked to participate? 

You are asked to voluntarily take part if you are a UK-based adult who uses a dating app/ dating apps [examples of dating apps include: Bumble, Grindr, Hinge, Tinder]. We would like you to participate in our study if you use a dating app/ dating apps monthly (or more frequently) and you would be happy to fill out some questionnaires after using them. We are aiming to recruit around 400 adult participants for this study.


What will happen to me if I take part? 
You will be asked to complete 5 weekly questionnaires for 4 weeks which together will  take approximately 60 minutes in total. The Baseline Survey is the longest and the surveys for later weeks are much shorter. You can begin this 4-week process at any time between August 2022 and December 2022. When you begin completing a survey, your answers will be saved so that they can be returned to later however where possible, we ask that you try to complete the questionnaires in one go.

We request that you try to use your dating app(s) as you normally would. The questionnaire data that you submit will be de-identified upon completion however as these questionnaires are not fully anonymous, the research team will be able to know whether you have participated. 


Are there any benefits in my taking part?
You will be entered into a prize draw to win one of ten Love2Shop shopping vouchers (£100) and an Apple iPad after you submit the fifth questionnaire in week 4. The study team will email you if you win the prize draw. Your participation will also help contribute to knowledge in an original area of research. 


Are there any risks involved?
It is expected that taking part in this study may cause a small risk of psychological discomfort and/ or distress to for some people. For example, there are questions on topics that can be highly sensitive such as self-harm and suicide. Should you feel uncomfortable you can leave the questionnaire at any time and/ or contact the following resources for support (there is an additional list of support services at the end of this document): 

Samaritans: If you or anyone you know is experiencing emotional distress and require support.
Contact phone: 116 123; Self-help App: https://selfhelp.samaritans.org/

NHS: Help for suicidal thoughts, if you are feeling like you want to die, it is important to tell someone. Help and support is available right now if you need it; you do not have to struggle with difficult feelings alone. A list of helplines are provided here: https://www.nhs.uk/mental-health/feelings-symptoms-behaviours/behaviours/help-for-suicidal-thoughts/

Mind.org.uk for explanations of self-harm including possible causes and how you can access treatments and support. Included here are tips for helping yourself and guidance for friends and family. https://www.mind.org.uk/information-support/types-of-mental-health-problems/self-harm/treatment-and-support/

You can contact the study team via smwhb@soton.ac.uk at any point to ask questions or to discuss your involvement in this study. The research team will log this feedback in a private and secure document and where necessary, signpost you towards the relevant guidance/ support if necessary. 


What data will be collected? 

Our questionnaires ask for information in relation to age, usage and attitudes towards dating apps, mental health and wellbeing, self-esteem, personality and narcissism. At the end of the questionnaire, you will be able to summarise your overall experience of using/ not using dating apps within the past week. Please note that you should not include any requests for guidance or signals of distress within this free-text field. Instead, you are encouraged to contact the support services that have been provided if you feel in any way distressed.  

Some of the information we wish to collect could be considered as temporarily distressing, upsetting or sensitive. There are questions relating to mental health, self-harm and suicide. You are under no obligation to respond to these questions if you do not wish to, you can pause or cease your participation in the study and/ or you can contact the support services that have been provided at the foot of this information sheet. 

We will collect these personal data/ special category data: ethnicity, gender, disability, sexual orientation, personal health and sex life and contact email address. This information is relevant, adequate and absolutely necessary for carrying out our study and these data will be strictly governed in line with Data Protection.


Will my participation be confidential?
Yes, your participation and information that you provide will remain strictly confidential. Only the named researchers on this project will have access to password-protected files (stored only on the secure University of Southampton server) that contain information about your participation and your data. In accordance with the Faculty of Medicine Research Conduct Guidelines, data will be held for 15 years after the study has finished. After this, they will be securely destroyed. 

Only members of the research team and responsible members of the University of Southampton may be given access to data about you for monitoring purposes and/ or to carry out an audit of the study to ensure that the research is complying with applicable regulations. Individuals from regulatory authorities (people who check that we are carrying out the study correctly) may require access to your data. All of these people have a duty to keep your information, as a research participant, strictly confidential.


Do I have to take part?
No, it is entirely up to you to decide whether or not to take part. If you decide you want to take part, you will need to consent by providing an e-signature to show you have agreed to take part. 


What happens if I change my mind?
You have the right to change your mind and withdraw at any time without giving a reason and without your participant rights being affected. If you do so prior to January 2023 (start of data analysis) we will erase all of your data. If you withdraw from the study after January 2023, we will keep the information about you that we have already obtained, for 15 years, for the purposes of achieving the objectives of the study only. 


What will happen to the results of the research?
Your personal details will remain strictly confidential. De-identified survey datasets and study outputs will be uploaded to PURE, the University of Southampton’s research information system and only the named researchers will have access to survey datasets. Research findings made available in any reports or publications will not include information that can directly identify you without your specific consent.

The comments that you provide within the free-text field at the end of the questionnaire will be pseudonymised and may be used to contextualise the statistical findings of our reports. The information that we collect will be analysed and written up into journal papers and presented at conferences and will be used to inform further (national/ international) studies into mental health, wellbeing and dating app usage.


Where can I get more information?
If you have any questions about this study and/ or the processing of your data then please do not hesitate to contact Dr Anthony Quinn via email: smhwb@soton.ac.uk The researchers also welcome feedback on individual experiences of participation given that this is a pilot study.


What happens if there is a problem?
If you have a concern about any aspect of this study, you should speak to the researchers (see above) who will do their best to answer your questions. If you remain unhappy or have a complaint about any aspect of this study, please contact the University of Southampton Research Integrity and Governance Manager (023 8059 5058, rgoinfo@soton.ac.uk). Please quote the Ethics/ ERGO number above. 

More information on your rights as a study participant is available via this link: 
https://www.southampton.ac.uk/about/governance/participant-information.page 

Data Protection Privacy Notice
The University of Southampton conducts research to the highest standards of research integrity. As a publicly-funded organisation, the University has to ensure that it is in the public interest when we use personally-identifiable information about people who have agreed to take part in research.  This means that when you agree to take part in a research study, we will use information about you in the ways needed, and for the purposes specified, to conduct and complete the research project. Under data protection law, ‘Personal data’ means any information that relates to and is capable of identifying a living individual. The University’s data protection policy governing the use of personal data by the University can be found on its website (https://www.southampton.ac.uk/legalservices/what-we-do/data-protection-and-foi.page). 

This Participant Information Sheet tells you what data will be collected for this project and whether this includes any personal data. Please ask the research team if you have any questions or are unclear what data is being collected about you. 

Our privacy notice for research participants provides more information on how the University of Southampton collects and uses your personal data when you take part in one of our research projects and can be found at http://www.southampton.ac.uk/assets/sharepoint/intranet/ls/Public/Research%20and%20Integrity%20Privacy%20Notice/Privacy%20Notice%20for%20Research%20Participants.pdf 

Any personal data we collect in this study will be used only for the purposes of carrying out our research and will be handled according to the University’s policies in line with data protection law. If any personal data is used from which you can be identified directly, it will not be disclosed to anyone else without your consent unless the University of Southampton is required by law to disclose it. 

Data protection law requires us to have a valid legal reason (‘lawful basis’) to process and use your Personal data. The lawful basis for processing personal information in this research study is for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest. Personal data collected for research will not be used for any other purpose.

For the purposes of data protection law, the University of Southampton is the ‘Data Controller’ for this study, which means that we are responsible for looking after your information and using it properly. The University of Southampton will keep identifiable information about you for 15 years after the study has finished after which time any link between you and your information will be removed.

To safeguard your rights, we will use the minimum personal data necessary to achieve our research study objectives. Your data protection rights – such as to access, change, or transfer such information - may be limited, however, in order for the research output to be reliable and accurate. The University will not do anything with your personal data that you would not reasonably expect. 

If you have any questions about how your personal data is used, or wish to exercise any of your rights, please consult the University’s data protection webpage (https://www.southampton.ac.uk/legalservices/what-we-do/data-protection-and-foi.page) where you can make a request using our online form. If you need further assistance, please contact the University’s Data Protection Officer (data.protection@soton.ac.uk).

Thank you for taking the time to read this information sheet and considering taking part in the research.


A list of support services: 

IN AN EMERGENCY
If you are experiencing suicidal thoughts and think you might be unable to keep yourself safe, visit your nearest Accident and Emergency department or call 999.

Samaritans: If you or anyone you know is experiencing emotional distress and require support.
Contact phone: 116 123; Self-help App: https://selfhelp.samaritans.org/

NHS: Mental Health: for information or advice about available mental health support services. 
Website: https://www.england.nhs.uk/mental-health/

Alcoholics Anonymous: for telephone, online and face-to-face help and advice related to alcohol or a drinking problem: https://www.alcoholics-anonymous.org.uk/ 

FRANK: for friendly, confidential drugs advice, call FRANK on: 0300 123 6600 or access their website: http://www.talktofrank.com.

Eating Problems
Beat: The UK’s leading eating disorder charity provides helplines which are open 365 days a year. These can be freely accessed on 0808 801 0677.
https://www.beateatingdisorders.org.uk/

Help after rape and sexual assault: for advice and to find your nearest sexual assault referral centre via the NHS website: https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/sexual-health/help-after-rape-and-sexual-assault/

Road/ Driving Safety
for information about road safety: https://www.think.gov.uk/
